---
date:    2019-01-14
subject: Compatibility of Cost-Center Development and Usability
tags:
    - ux
    - reality
    - career
abstract: |
    Lessons learned over two years and several projects attempting to
    apply what I had learned after completing my masters in User
    Experience Design.
---

## What is "cost-center development" anyway?

While not universally true in all cases, in this post I'm using the
term "cost-center development" as shorthand for __development in
support of business-to-business (B2B) or business-to-government (B2G)
activity__ and "profit-center development" as shorthand for
__development in support of business-to-consumer (B2C) activity__.

Generally speaking, cost-centers don't bring in money but instead aim
to reduce cost in some way while profit-centers bring in more money
than they cost to operate.


## The fundamental problem

Successfully optimizing for user experience requires explicit buy-in
from leadership and acceptance that the value UX brings is hard to
directly quantify, which isn't something decision makers of cost-center
activities have the stomach for.

Cost-centers don't bring in money, so any activity that increases cost
is allowed if and only if ignoring it will introduce legal/regulatory
risk.  The process of maximizing usability takes time and intentional
thought to get right.  In cost-center activities, the customer usually
has a large say in the delivery timeline and will look to omit
anything that costs more that looks easy to omit.  This problem is
made worse the further removed the customer's decision makers are from
the customer's end users.

On the other end, profit-centers live and die by their sales.  This
makes selling usability much easier as business leadership has become
more aware of the relationship between UX and a product's adoption by
a discerning public.


## Cost-centers sometimes pretend to be profit-centers...

Many software projects that exist in cost-centers, in a desire to
attract developers and designers capable of delivering well-functioning
systems that users won't hate, will downplay the second-class citizen
nature of UX to their organization/activity.  Some may even outright
_ask_ for someone with a solid understanding of UX.

### Why does this happen?

The reason for this behavior is usually an effort to secure follow-on
work if _someone_ on the other side of the table is wow-ed enough with
the results (sadly, visual appeal is often enough to wow both
parties).

This isn't as intentionally dishonest as it sounds.  Consider that
many people hear "UX" and think "oh this person slings JavaScript and
CSS or something" while others think "oh they do stuff with
Photoshop".  There isn't enough concrete understanding out there of
_what_ UX actually is.  So when the cost-center gets a bonafide but
otherwise naive UX practitioner who starts talking about running
usability tests and doing research instead of just writing the
stinkin' code and closing tickets, project managers start getting
nervous about missing deadlines.

The project manager may humor the UX practitioner's appeals to process
but won't alter delivery schedules to accommodate anything that's not
explicitly a coding task.  This has the effect of "code this" Jira
tickets piling up while UX activities are conducted -OR- the UX
practitioner scuttles sound usability practice in order to meet their
code deliverables.  __Either way, something gets sacrificed: codebase
stability or usability.__

### So that "naive UX practitioner" up there was me...

I left that company last summer.  Despite being constantly asked to
"do UX" but not being given enough time to do it properly for fear of
falling behind, our customers seemed happy with the deliverables and
gave us follow-on work so both parties felt they got their money's
worth.  And despite being asked to do two and half people's jobs, the
company paid fairly well so I wasn't bitter, just tired.

And so, a little older and a little wiser, I reassessed my career
priorities and expectations and moved on.

A few months later, as if responding to the disturbance in the force
caused by my awakening, one of my old professors posted to LinkedIn a
debunking of the corporate legend of the "UX Unicorn" (i.e., UX
designers that write code):

> This will be a hard pill for many to swallow, but the history of UX
occupations proves that coding and programming are NOT truly a part of
mainstream UX operation. In other words, one seeking a role in UX need
not have programming skills in order to do his or her job.

> Can you have coders on your UX team? Yes, but that's not the point
we're addressing. Programming and coding were and are only a part of
the UXer's role when working for companies in the lower quadrant (at
least) of UX maturity. The more mature a company is (or was) the less
likely a UXer would be looked to for coding. The less mature, the more
hats a person was likely to be asked and/or expected to wear.

> Coding does not help with information architecture.

> Coding does not help with interaction design.

> Coding does not help with research.

> Coding does not help prescribe optimal usability.

> Coding does not help with cognition.

> Coding does not help with empathy.

> Coding does not help create experience or journey maps.

> Coding does not help with ethnography.

> It....just....ain't....a....thing.... no matter how anyone tries to
spin it and no matter how people keep trying to redefine the UX world.
<span class="quoth">Prof. Darren Hood</span>

A hard pill indeed.
